docs(spec): BicepSettings AzureWI + AwsIrsa runtime completion (fast-follow design note) (#12511)
radius-project/radius: eng/design-notes/recipes/2026-07-bicep-settings-identity-auth-fast-follow.md

# Topic: BicepSettings Identity Authentication Fast Follow

- **Author**: Sylvain + Copilot draft
- **Status**: Draft for review

## Topic Summary

`Radius.Core/bicepSettings` currently accepts three authentication methods in schema (`BasicAuth`, `AzureWI`, `AwsIrsa`), but only `BasicAuth` is wired through runtime execution. This document specifies the fast-follow work to complete end-to-end support for `AzureWI` and `AwsIrsa` during recipe execution while preserving backward compatibility for existing `BasicAuth` flows.

This is intentionally scoped to runtime completion of the existing API contract. It does not introduce new REST resource types or a new auth model.

## Context and Problem

> The checked-in architecture document already calls out this limitation as a follow-up. API validation accepts identity methods, but the environment-to-driver bridge currently only forwards entries containing `basicAuthSecretId`, which makes `AzureWI` and `AwsIrsa` no-ops at runtime.

Author: Fixed: added explicit link to docs/architecture/terraform-bicep-config.md with section anchor (commit fdca31cd8). Note: correct filename is terraform-bicep-config.md not terraform-bicep-settings.md as suggested.

# Topic: BicepSettings Identity Authentication Fast Follow

- **Author**: Sylvain Niles
- **Status**: Draft for review

> ## Topic Summary

Reviewer: Can you add some details as to what feature these changes are meant to support?

> `Radius.Core/bicepSettings` lets a platform engineer configure how Radius authenticates to private Bicep registries when pulling recipe templates. Authentication is keyed by registry hostname, and each entry declares an `authenticationMethod`: `BasicAuth` (username/password from a secret), `AzureWI` (Azure Workload Identity), or `AwsIrsa` (AWS IAM Roles for Service Accounts). The public schema and controller validation accept all three methods today, but only `BasicAuth` is actually honored when a recipe runs — `AzureWI` and `AwsIrsa` are accepted, persisted, and then silently ignored at execution time.

Reviewer 2: `Azure Workload Identity` is not valid naming nowadays. It used to be `Azure AD Workload Identity`, currently is `Entra Workload Identity`.

`AzureWI` -> `EntraWI` ?

This fast-follow closes that gap by extending the internal runtime descriptor with identity fields, making the bridge forward every method (not just secret-backed ones), and making the driver materialize the correct auth client per method — so the configuration a user is already allowed to persist becomes the configuration that actually runs.

## Goals

1. Make `AzureWI` and `AwsIrsa` in `Radius.Core/bicepSettings` effective at recipe execution time.
2. Keep `BasicAuth` behavior unchanged and compatible with both `Radius.Security/secrets` and `Applications.Core/secretStores`.
3. Eliminate silent skip behavior for valid non-BasicAuth entries.
4. Preserve the existing public REST schema for `bicepSettings` (no breaking API changes).
5. Provide deterministic, test-covered behavior for all three methods.

## Non-goals

1. No redesign of the `bicepSettings` schema.
2. No new auth method additions.
3. No migration tooling for existing resources.
4. No changes to Terraform settings behavior.

## Desired End State

For each `registryAuthentications[host]` entry:

- `BasicAuth`: runtime uses secret-backed username/password credentials.

> - `AzureWI`: runtime uses `azureWiClientId` + `azureWiTenantId` from the settings entry (no secret dependency).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `EntraWI`: runtime uses `EntraClientId` + `EntraTenantId` from the settings entry (no secret dependency).
```

Reviewer 3: keeping Azure WI

This avoids accidental secret loader calls with empty IDs and aligns data dependencies with method semantics.

### 4. Build auth payload for authclient deterministically

Current authclient factory consumes `recipes.SecretData` with a `Type` and key-value map. Keep that contract, but produce data per method:

- `BasicAuth`: from fetched secret values (`username`, `password`) and type mapping.
- `AzureWI`: synthesize `recipes.SecretData` with type `azureWorkloadIdentity` and data keys `clientId`, `tenantId` from bridged fields.
- `AwsIrsa`: synthesize `recipes.SecretData` with type `awsIRSA` and data key `roleARN` from bridged fields.

The runtime path should not depend on the secret resource kind for identity methods.

### 5. Strengthen runtime error semantics

Validation already enforces conditional required fields at controller level. Runtime should still fail clearly if malformed data reaches execution (defense in depth).

Examples:

- `AzureWI` missing `clientId` or `tenantId` at execution path => explicit error naming host + missing fields.
- `AwsIrsa` missing role ARN => explicit error naming host.
- Unknown auth method => explicit error listing supported methods.

> ### 6. Preserve backward compatibility

Reviewer 4: What is the current behavior today if no auth is specified?

Author: I'll add explicit call out that none specified doesn't throw an error.
